SIFIS-Home use-case (#211)
w3c/wot-usecases: USE-CASES/hazard-annotations.md

## Title: Connected Hazards

### Submitter(s):

Luca Barbato

### Reviewer(s):

<Suggest reviewers>

### Tracker Issue ID:

<please leave blank>

### Category:

"vertical"

### Class:

<please leave blank>

### Status:

<please leave blank>

### Target Users

- device owners
- device users
- device manufacturers

### Motivation:

Connected devices have an impact on the physical world, more than often interacting with them may have unintended consequences.

The use-case originated within [SIFIS-Home](https://sifis-home.eu) project, where the focus is on trustworthy connected homes:
The user should be made fully aware of the hazards related to the connected devices operations, be able to declare policies regarding acceptable risks, and have the home system enforce them.

> The focus is on the problem of having the information available and how to deliver it to all the possible actors.

Reviewer: The original point was on "awareness" and scope has been expanded to include policy and enforcement.  However, we can keep the *focus* on awareness.  Suggest the following:
```suggestion
This use case discusses all three aspects (awareness, policies, and enforcement) but the focus is on the foundational problem of awareness: having the information hazards available and delivering it to all the possible actors.
```

> Few scenarios on how the information could be consumed in useful and advanced ways are provided.

Reviewer: "Few" as used implies "hardly any" in English, and is not the connotation you probably want here.  Suggest "Some", same meaning, but more positive:
```suggestion
Some scenarios on how the information could be consumed in useful and advanced ways are provided.
```

### Expected Devices:

Any device that may pose a physical or privacy hazard to the user should provide information on the risks e.g.:
    - Fire hazards: Ovens, Stoves, Lamps

>     - Flood hazards: Windows, Faucets

Reviewer: I know this is an "e.g." list and so not meant to be exhaustive, but a few more hazards would be helpful (eventually these can become "hazard categories" in an ontology:
```suggestion
    - Flood hazards: Windows, Faucets
    - Chemical hazards: CO emissions e.g. for cars or heating systems, Battery venting
    - Electrical hazards: Solar panels, Batteries
```

    - Invasion: Doors, Windows
    - Privacy: Cameras, Microphones

Any device that can be used to detect problems ongoing e.g.:
    - Smoke detectors
    - Motion detectors

Any device with the ability to aggregate the information available and either prevent behavior or detect behavior.

### Expected Data:

The devices should provide some kind of labeling metadata to deliver the hazard information connected with all the possible interactions with it.

It could be as coarse as cover any access to the device or specific to the point of selecting a range of operation within the single specific interaction, e.g.:

> - Accessing a connected camera is a privacy hazard

Reviewer: Not sure *accessing* a camera is a privacy hazard, but *providing* a camera feed is.
```suggestion
- Providing a feed from a connected camera is a privacy hazard
```

- Setting an high level of brightness on an halogen lamp might involve risks of overheating it or setting something nearby on fire.

Some devices may provide additional information on hazards they may simply detect and default policies other devices may try to enforce e.g.:
- A smart meter may notify that the energy flowing through it is over a threshold and the information may trigger a policy that sets some smart switches off.

Some devices may provide information that can be aggregated together to derive/evaluate a risk:

> - A CO₂/VOC sensor may provide a default policy that modulate the smoke and fire hazard evaluation based on its own information, but in itself may not detect smoke or temperature.

Reviewer: Carbon monoxide is more hazardous than carbon dioxide and CO sensors are often combined with smoke sensors.  CO2 is more of an air quality issue (a high level indicates a need for ventilation, but unless it is *really* high is not that serious of hazard.  But even a small amount of CO is a life-threatening hazard).
```suggestion
- A CO/CO₂/VOC sensor may provide a default policy that modulate the smoke and fire hazard evaluation based on its own information, but in itself may not detect smoke or temperature.
```

> - A connected Oven may not have a smart meter embedded but may provide enough information to desume the energy consumption by the temperature of its heating elements.

Reviewer: typo
```suggestion
- A connected Oven may not have a smart meter embedded but may provide enough information to determine the energy consumption by the temperature of its heating elements.
```

Author: In SIFIS energy consumption is in itself an hazard since we consider also the economic impact of it plus the risk of overloading the system.

### Dependencies - Affected WoT deliverables and/or work items:

The current Thing Description is adequate to support the model, the hazards annotations can be bound to the specific Form Operation for each Interaction Affordance.
Additional vocabulary terms may be needed to support a finer level of granularity or declare default policies or formulas to derive additional hazard based on the aggregation of information provided by different devices..

### Description:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the focus of this use case is on awareness, once we have established awareness 
we can consider the related issues of policy and enforcement.
```

> The user may have a mean of setting policies to restrict interactions with connected devices, e.g.:

Reviewer: The word "mean" is not usually used in the singular, it is an idiom and always used in the plural with this meaning.  Maybe better to avoid idiomatic language and use a different wording:
```suggestion
The user may have a mechanism to set policies to restrict interactions with connected devices, e.g.:
```

> - Stop any interaction with the TV between 3:00PM and 5:00PM if an unattended children is detected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Stop any interaction with the TV between 3:00PM and 5:00PM if unattended children are detected.
```

- Require stronger authentication to open a door if the user is considered already inside the house.

The home system may automously change the state of a device to reduce the risk level, e.g.:
- Reduce the brightness of an Halogen Lamp
- Start the A/C system if a room temperature is outside the bearable range and a person is detected inside.

The same considerations apply to larger scale (e.g. apartment buildings, neighbourhoods, cities) or slightly different contexts such as industry or hospitals.

The risk categories may be diversified to cover field-specific risks, but the structure remains the same:
- The Thing Description would provide the hazard information
- Consumer may act on it or enrich/aggregate it and pass it forward for further processing

### Security Considerations:

The system relies on being able to trust the information exchanged and has to detect bad actors.

### Privacy Considerations:

> Privacy is one of the possible category of hazards that may be accounted for, it is no different from a physical hazard in this use-case.

Reviewer: Not completely true.  Privacy and Invasion are related in that the hazard is *other people* and privacy in particular is related to leaking of information to other people.   So the different thing about privacy is that it matters where a given information flow goes.  A camera is a hazard because the information flow MAY be leaked to someone outside the set of people the owner wants to provide it to.  But it's not a problem if that information goes to the intended recipient.  Something like a fire hazard only involves the device and the user (although even then a fire hazard only means a fire MAY happen in certain circumstances).

One thing missing by the way is a definition of "hazard".   A hazard is a *risk* of something bad happening.  You might want to dig up the ISO definition and put it somewhere.

Reviewer: https://advisera.com/45001academy/blog/2016/03/23/hazards-vs-risks-what-is-the-difference-according-to-disiso-45001/#:~:text=What%20is%20a%20Hazard%20in,the%20ability%20to%20harm%20individuals%3F

Reviewer: ISO/DIS 45001:
hazard: “source or situation with a potential to cause injury and ill health” 
- This standard is for "operational hazards" e.g. in a business, for workplace safety, but still useful.
- You might have to expand it a bit to include "violation of privacy" under "injury".
- This document also has a useful list of hazard categories.

Author: > Not completely true. Privacy and Invasion are related in that the hazard is _other people_ and privacy in particular is related to leaking of information to other people. So the different thing about privacy is that it matters where a given information flow goes. A camera is a hazard because the information flow MAY be leaked to someone outside the set of people the owner wants to provide it to. But it's not a problem if that information goes to the intended recipient. Something like a fire hazard only involves the device and the user (although even then a fire hazard only means a fire MAY happen in certain circumstances).

The hazards are processed exactly in the same way no matter the kind. e.g. the oven may roast a chicken or roast a wooden block you left inside, potentially causing a fire. It is not different from a connected camera streaming to the wrong endpoint at the wrong time.

> 
> One thing missing by the way is a definition of "hazard". A hazard is a _risk_ of something bad happening. You might want to dig up the ISO definition and put it somewhere.

Sounds a good idea, thank you :)

### Accessibility Considerations:

> The system may be extended to cover accessibility concerns and have specific policies.

Reviewer: Should mention that alerts of hazards should be accessible, e.g. perceivable by people with different abilities.  For example, an alarm should be both visual and audible.  An alarm device that is only audible (e.g. a bell, but no light) may have an "Inaccessible to people with hearing disorders" "hazard" associated with it.

Reviewer: Still think a little more text would be useful here.

### Internationalisation (i18n) Considerations:

> Being also user-facing, the hazard information should be translated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Being also user-facing, hazard information should be translated or otherwise made
available in the users' language.
```

### Requirements:

The Thing Description does not have specific fields to deliver all the information described, but the existing structure can be augmented through additional vocabulary terms.
Any interaction among Things and Consumers is within the normal operation and should not require changes.

#### Protocol Requirements

"flexible"

#### Content Type Requirements

"flexible"

#### Platform or Standard Requirements

"none"

#### Authentication and Authorization Mechanisms Requirements

"flexible"

### Gaps:

> ### Existing standards:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Existing standards:

There are many existing standards for various types of hazards in specific industries and
locals, for example for electrical or chemical hazards.  There are also in many locales legal
requirements for package labelling and in-package notifications, e.g. for chemical, electrical,
or ergonomic hazards.  However, this information needs to be presented in a common
electronic format that is accessible to e.g. home automation systems.  It may be necessary
to develop a new ontology for general categories of hazards that are location-idenpendent,
but this should be based on existing hazard labelling whenever possible.
```

### Description:
While the focus of this use case is on awareness, once we have established awareness 
we can consider the related issues of policy and enforcement.
The user may have a mechanism to set policies to restrict interactions with connected devices, e.g.:
- Stop any interaction with the TV between 3:00PM and 5:00PM if unattended children are detected.
- Require stronger authentication to open a door if the user is considered already inside the house.

The home system may automously change the state of a device to reduce the risk level, e.g.:
- Reduce the brightness of an Halogen Lamp
- Start the A/C system if a room temperature is outside the bearable range and a person is detected inside.

The same considerations apply to larger scale (e.g. apartment buildings, neighbourhoods, cities) or slightly different contexts such as industry or hospitals.

The risk categories may be diversified to cover field-specific risks, but the structure remains the same:
- The Thing Description would provide the hazard information
- Consumer may act on it or enrich/aggregate it and pass it forward for further processing

### Security Considerations:

> The system relies on being able to trust the information exchanged and has to detect bad actors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system relies on being able to trust the information exchanged and has to detect bad actors.
For example, if a sensor can be spoofed as to report a fire hazard that results in a door unlocking (even though there
is no fire), that would result in a physical security issue.
```
